<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXXV: The Day</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="scene-7" id="chapter-35" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</h4>
				<p epub:type="title">The Day</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The promise of the weatherglass was fulfilled. The sun shone on Blanche’s marriage.</p>
			<p>At nine in the morning the first of the proceedings of the day began. It was essentially of a clandestine nature. The bride and bridegroom evaded the restraints of lawful authority, and presumed to meet together privately, before they were married, in the conservatory at Ham Farm.</p>
			<p>“You have read my letter, Arnold?”</p>
			<p>“I have come here to answer it, Blanche. But why not have told me? Why write?”</p>
			<p>“Because I put off telling you so long; and because I didn’t know how you might take it; and for fifty other reasons. Never mind! I’ve made my confession. I haven’t a single secret now which is not your secret too. There’s time to say no, Arnold, if you think I ought to have no room in my heart for anybody but you. My uncle tells me I am obstinate and wrong in refusing to give Anne up. If you agree with him, say the word, dear, before you make me your wife.”</p>
			<p>“Shall I tell you what I said to Sir Patrick last night?”</p>
			<p>“About <em>this</em>?”</p>
			<p>“Yes. The confession (as you call it) which you make in your pretty note, is the very thing that Sir Patrick spoke to me about in the dining-room before I went away. He told me your heart was set on finding Miss Silvester. And he asked me what I meant to do about it when we were married.”</p>
			<p>“And you said⁠—?”</p>
			<p>Arnold repeated his answer to Sir Patrick, with fervid embellishments of the original language, suitable to the emergency. Blanche’s delight expressed itself in the form of two unblushing outrages on propriety, committed in close succession. She threw her arms round Arnold’s neck; and she actually kissed him three hours before the consent of State and Church sanctioned her in taking that proceeding. Let us shudder⁠—but let us not blame her. These are the consequences of free institutions.</p>
			<p>“Now,” said Arnold, “it’s my turn to take to pen and ink. I have a letter to write before we are married as well as you. Only there’s this difference between us⁠—I want you to help me.”</p>
			<p>“Who are you going to write to?”</p>
			<p>“To my lawyer in Edinburgh. There will be no time unless I do it now. We start for Switzerland this afternoon⁠—don’t we?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“Very well. I want to relieve your mind, my darling, before we go. Wouldn’t you like to know⁠—while we are away⁠—that the right people are on the lookout for Miss Silvester? Sir Patrick has told me of the last place that she has been traced to⁠—and my lawyer will set the right people at work. Come and help me to put it in the proper language, and the whole thing will be in train.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Arnold! can I ever love you enough to reward you for this!”</p>
			<p>“We shall see, Blanche⁠—in Switzerland.”</p>
			<p>They audaciously penetrated, arm in arm, into Sir Patrick’s own study⁠—entirely at their disposal, as they well knew, at that hour of the morning. With Sir Patrick’s pens and Sir Patrick’s paper they produced a letter of instructions, deliberately reopening the investigation which Sir Patrick’s superior wisdom had closed. Neither pains nor money were to be spared by the lawyer in at once taking measures (beginning at Glasgow) to find Anne. The report of the result was to be addressed to Arnold, under cover to Sir Patrick at Ham Farm. By the time the letter was completed the morning had advanced to ten o’clock. Blanche left Arnold to array herself in her bridal splendor⁠—after another outrage on propriety, and more consequences of free institutions.</p>
			<p>The next proceedings were of a public and avowable nature, and strictly followed the customary precedents on such occasions.</p>
			<p>Village nymphs strewed flowers on the path to the church door (and sent in the bill the same day). Village swains rang the joy-bells (and got drunk on their money the same evening). There was the proper and awful pause while the bridegroom was kept waiting at the church. There was the proper and pitiless staring of all the female spectators when the bride was led to the altar. There was the clergyman’s preliminary look at the license⁠—which meant official caution. And there was the clerk’s preliminary look at the bridegroom⁠—which meant official fees. All the women appeared to be in their natural element; and all the men appeared to be out of it.</p>
			<p>Then the service began⁠—rightly-considered, the most terrible, surely, of all mortal ceremonies⁠—the service which binds two human beings, who know next to nothing of each other’s natures, to risk the tremendous experiment of living together till death parts them⁠—the service which says, in effect if not in words, take your leap in the dark: we sanctify, but we don’t insure, it!</p>
			<p>The ceremony went on, without the slightest obstacle to mar its effect. There were no unforeseen interruptions. There were no ominous mistakes.</p>
			<p>The last words were spoken, and the book was closed. They signed their names on the register; the husband was congratulated; the wife was embraced. They went back again to the house, with more flowers strewn at their feet. The wedding-breakfast was hurried; the wedding-speeches were curtailed: there was no time to be wasted, if the young couple were to catch the tidal train.</p>
			<p>In an hour more the carriage had whirled them away to the station, and the guests had given them the farewell cheer from the steps of the house. Young, happy, fondly attached to each other, raised securely above all the sordid cares of life, what a golden future was theirs! Married with the sanction of the Family and the blessing of the Church⁠—who could suppose that the time was coming, nevertheless, when the blighting question would fall on them, in the springtime of their love: Are you man and wife?</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
