<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6: The Suitor</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="story" epub:type="part">
			<section id="scene-1" epub:type="division">
				<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
					<h4 epub:type="title">
						<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>
						<span epub:type="subtitle">The Suitor</span>
					</h4>
					<p>Lady Lundie pointed significantly to the door, and addressed herself to Sir Patrick’s private ear.</p>
					<p>“Observe!” she said. “Miss Silvester has just got rid of somebody.”</p>
					<p>Sir Patrick deliberately looked in the wrong direction, and (in the politest possible manner) observed⁠—nothing.</p>
					<p>Lady Lundie advanced into the summerhouse. Suspicious hatred of the governess was written legibly in every line of her face. Suspicious distrust of the governess’s illness spoke plainly in every tone of her voice.</p>
					<p>“May I inquire, Miss Silvester, if your sufferings are relieved?”</p>
					<p>“I am no better, Lady Lundie.”</p>
					<p>“I beg your pardon?”</p>
					<p>“I said I was no better.”</p>
					<p>“You appear to be able to stand up. When <em>I</em> am ill, I am not so fortunate. I am obliged to lie down.” ’</p>
					<p>“I will follow your example, Lady Lundie. If you will be so good as to excuse me, I will leave you, and lie down in my own room.”</p>
					<p>She could say no more. The interview with Geoffrey had worn her out; there was no spirit left in her to resist the petty malice of the woman, after bearing, as she had borne it, the brutish indifference of the man. In another moment the hysterical suffering which she was keeping down would have forced its way outward in tears. Without waiting to know whether she was excused or not, without stopping to hear a word more, she left the summerhouse.</p>
					<p>Lady Lundie’s magnificent black eyes opened to their utmost width, and blazed with their most dazzling brightness. She appealed to Sir Patrick, poised easily on his ivory cane, and looking out at the lawn-party, the picture of venerable innocence.</p>
					<p>“After what I have already told you, Sir Patrick, of Miss Silvester’s conduct, may I ask whether you consider <em>that</em> proceeding at all extraordinary?”</p>
					<p>The old gentleman touched the spring in the knob of his cane, and answered, in the courtly manner of the old school:</p>
					<p>“I consider no proceeding extraordinary Lady Lundie, which emanates from your enchanting sex.”</p>
					<p>He bowed, and took his pinch. With a little jaunty flourish of the hand, he dusted the stray grains of snuff off his finger and thumb, and looked back again at the lawn-party, and became more absorbed in the diversions of his young friends than ever.</p>
					<p>Lady Lundie stood her ground, plainly determined to force a serious expression of opinion from her brother-in-law. Before she could speak again, Arnold and Blanche appeared together at the bottom of the steps. “And when does the dancing begin?” inquired Sir Patrick, advancing to meet them, and looking as if he felt the deepest interest in a speedy settlement of the question.</p>
					<p>“The very thing I was going to ask mamma,” returned Blanche. “Is she in there with Anne? Is Anne better?”</p>
					<p>Lady Lundie forthwith appeared, and took the answer to that inquiry on herself.</p>
					<p>“Miss Silvester has retired to her room. Miss Silvester persists in being ill. Have you noticed, Sir Patrick, that these half-bred sort of people are almost invariably rude when they are ill?”</p>
					<p>Blanche’s bright face flushed up. “If you think Anne a half-bred person, Lady Lundie, you stand alone in your opinion. My uncle doesn’t agree with you, I’m sure.”</p>
					<p>Sir Patrick’s interest in the first quadrille became almost painful to see. “<em>Do</em> tell me, my dear, when <em>is</em> the dancing going to begin?”</p>
					<p>“The sooner the better,” interposed Lady Lundie; “before Blanche picks another quarrel with me on the subject of Miss Silvester.”</p>
					<p>Blanche looked at her uncle. “Begin! begin! Don’t lose time!” cried the ardent Sir Patrick, pointing toward the house with his cane. “Certainly, uncle! Anything that <em>you</em> wish!” With that parting shot at her stepmother, Blanche withdrew. Arnold, who had thus far waited in silence at the foot of the steps, looked appealingly at Sir Patrick. The train which was to take him to his newly inherited property would start in less than an hour; and he had not presented himself to Blanche’s guardian in the character of Blanche’s suitor yet! Sir Patrick’s indifference to all domestic claims on him⁠—claims of persons who loved, and claims of persons who hated, it didn’t matter which⁠—remained perfectly unassailable. There he stood, poised on his cane, humming an old Scotch air. And there was Lady Lundie, resolute not to leave him till he had seen the governess with <em>her</em> eyes and judged the governess with <em>her</em> mind. She returned to the charge⁠—in spite of Sir Patrick, humming at the top of the steps, and of Arnold, waiting at the bottom. (Her enemies said, “No wonder poor Sir Thomas died in a few months after his marriage!” And, oh dear me, our enemies <em>are</em> sometimes right!)</p>
					<p>“I must once more remind you, Sir Patrick, that I have serious reason to doubt whether Miss Silvester is a fit companion for Blanche. My governess has something on her mind. She has fits of crying in private. She is up and walking about her room when she ought to be asleep. She posts her own letters⁠—<em>and,</em> she has lately been excessively insolent to Me. There is something wrong. I must take some steps in the matter⁠—and it is only proper that I should do so with your sanction, as head of the family.”</p>
					<p>“Consider me as abdicating my position, Lady Lundie, in your favor.”</p>
					<p>“Sir Patrick, I beg you to observe that I am speaking seriously, and that I expect a serious reply.”</p>
					<p>“My good lady, ask me for anything else and it is at your service. I have not made a serious reply since I gave up practice at the Scottish Bar. At my age,” added Sir Patrick, cunningly drifting into generalities, “nothing is serious⁠—except Indigestion. I say, with the philosopher, ‘Life is a comedy to those who think, and tragedy to those who feel.’ ” He took his sister-in-law’s hand, and kissed it. “Dear Lady Lundie, why feel?”</p>
					<p>Lady Lundie, who had never “felt” in her life, appeared perversely determined to feel, on this occasion. She was offended⁠—and she showed it plainly.</p>
					<p>“When you are next called on, Sir Patrick, to judge of Miss Silvester’s conduct,” she said, “unless I am entirely mistaken, you will find yourself <em>compelled</em> to consider it as something beyond a joke.” With those words, she walked out of the summerhouse⁠—and so forwarded Arnold’s interests by leaving Blanche’s guardian alone at last.</p>
					<p>It was an excellent opportunity. The guests were safe in the house⁠—there was no interruption to be feared, Arnold showed himself. Sir Patrick (perfectly undisturbed by Lady Lundie’s parting speech) sat down in the summerhouse, without noticing his young friend, and asked himself a question founded on profound observation of the female sex. “Were there ever two women yet with a quarrel between them,” thought the old gentleman, “who didn’t want to drag a man into it? Let them drag <em>me</em> in, if they can!”</p>
					<p>Arnold advanced a step, and modestly announced himself. “I hope I am not in the way, Sir Patrick?”</p>
					<p>“In the way? of course not! Bless my soul, how serious the boy looks! Are <em>you</em> going to appeal to me as the head of the family next?”</p>
					<p>It was exactly what Arnold was about to do. But it was plain that if he admitted it just then Sir Patrick (for some unintelligible reason) would decline to listen to him. He answered cautiously, “I asked leave to consult you in private, Sir; and you kindly said you would give me the opportunity before I left Windygates?”</p>
					<p>“Ay! ay! to be sure. I remember. We were both engaged in the serious business of croquet at the time⁠—and it was doubtful which of us did that business most clumsily. Well, here is the opportunity; and here am I, with all my worldly experience, at your service. I have only one caution to give you. Don’t appeal to me as ‘the head of the family.’ My resignation is in Lady Lundie’s hands.”</p>
					<p>He was, as usual, half in jest, half in earnest. The wry twist of humor showed itself at the corners of his lips. Arnold was at a loss how to approach Sir Patrick on the subject of his niece without reminding him of his domestic responsibilities on the one hand, and without setting himself up as a target for the shafts of Sir Patrick’s wit on the other. In this difficulty, he committed a mistake at the outset. He hesitated.</p>
					<p>“Don’t hurry yourself,” said Sir Patrick. “Collect your ideas. I can wait! I can wait!”</p>
					<p>Arnold collected his ideas⁠—and committed a second mistake. He determined on feeling his way cautiously at first. Under the circumstances (and with such a man as he had now to deal with), it was perhaps the rashest resolution at which he could possibly have arrived⁠—it was the mouse attempting to outmanoeuvre the cat.</p>
					<p>“You have been very kind, Sir, in offering me the benefit of your experience,” he began. “I want a word of advice.”</p>
					<p>“Suppose you take it sitting?” suggested Sir Patrick. “Get a chair.” His sharp eyes followed Arnold with an expression of malicious enjoyment. “Wants my advice?” he thought. “The young humbug wants nothing of the sort⁠—he wants my niece.”</p>
					<p>Arnold sat down under Sir Patrick’s eye, with a well-founded suspicion that he was destined to suffer, before he got up again, under Sir Patrick’s tongue.</p>
					<p>“I am only a young man,” he went on, moving uneasily in his chair, “and I am beginning a new life⁠—”</p>
					<p>“Anything wrong with the chair?” asked Sir Patrick. “Begin your new life comfortably, and get another.”</p>
					<p>“There’s nothing wrong with the chair, Sir. Would you⁠—”</p>
					<p>“Would I keep the chair, in that case? Certainly.”</p>
					<p>“I mean, would you advise me⁠—”</p>
					<p>“My good fellow, I’m waiting to advise you. (I’m sure there’s something wrong with that chair. Why be obstinate about it? Why not get another?)”</p>
					<p>“Please don’t notice the chair, Sir Patrick⁠—you put me out. I want⁠—in short⁠—perhaps it’s a curious question⁠—”</p>
					<p>“I can’t say till I have heard it,” remarked Sir Patrick. “However, we will admit it, for form’s sake, if you like. Say it’s a curious question. Or let us express it more strongly, if that will help you. Say it’s the most extraordinary question that ever was put, since the beginning of the world, from one human being to another.”</p>
					<p>“It’s this!” Arnold burst out, desperately. “I want to be married!”</p>
					<p>“That isn’t a question,” objected Sir Patrick. “It’s an assertion. You say, I want to be married. And I say, Just so! And there’s an end of it.”</p>
					<p>Arnold’s head began to whirl. “Would you advise me to get married, Sir?” he said, piteously. “That’s what I meant.”</p>
					<p>“Oh! That’s the object of the present interview, is it? Would I advise you to marry, eh?”</p>
					<p>(Having caught the mouse by this time, the cat lifted his paw and let the luckless little creature breathe again. Sir Patrick’s manner suddenly freed itself from any slight signs of impatience which it might have hitherto shown, and became as pleasantly easy and confidential as a manner could be. He touched the knob of his cane, and helped himself, with infinite zest and enjoyment, to a pinch of snuff.)</p>
					<p>“Would I advise you to marry?” repeated Sir Patrick. “Two courses are open to us, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Arnold, in treating that question. We may put it briefly, or we may put it at great length. I am for putting it briefly. What do you say?”</p>
					<p>“What you say, Sir Patrick.”</p>
					<p>“Very good. May I begin by making an inquiry relating to your past life?”</p>
					<p>“Certainly!”</p>
					<p>“Very good again. When you were in the merchant service, did you ever have any experience in buying provisions ashore?”</p>
					<p>Arnold stared. If any relation existed between that question and the subject in hand it was an impenetrable relation to <em>him</em>. He answered, in unconcealed bewilderment, “Plenty of experience, Sir.”</p>
					<p>“I’m coming to the point,” pursued Sir Patrick. “Don’t be astonished. I’m coming to the point. What did you think of your moist sugar when you bought it at the grocer’s?”</p>
					<p>“Think?” repeated Arnold. “Why, I thought it was moist sugar, to be sure!”</p>
					<p>“Marry, by all means!” cried Sir Patrick. “You are one of the few men who can try that experiment with a fair chance of success.”</p>
					<p>The suddenness of the answer fairly took away Arnold’s breath. There was something perfectly electric in the brevity of his venerable friend. He stared harder than ever.</p>
					<p>“Don’t you understand me?” asked Sir Patrick.</p>
					<p>“I don’t understand what the moist sugar has got to do with it, Sir.”</p>
					<p>“You don’t see that?”</p>
					<p>“Not a bit!”</p>
					<p>“Then I’ll show you,” said Sir Patrick, crossing his legs, and setting in comfortably for a good talk “You go to the teashop, and get your moist sugar. You take it on the understanding that it is moist sugar. But it isn’t anything of the sort. It’s a compound of adulterations made up to look like sugar. You shut your eyes to that awkward fact, and swallow your adulterated mess in various articles of food; and you and your sugar get on together in that way as well as you can. Do you follow me, so far?”</p>
					<p>Yes. Arnold (quite in the dark) followed, so far.</p>
					<p>“Very good,” pursued Sir Patrick. “You go to the marriage-shop, and get a wife. You take her on the understanding⁠—let us say⁠—that she has lovely yellow hair, that she has an exquisite complexion, that her figure is the perfection of plumpness, and that she is just tall enough to carry the plumpness off. You bring her home, and you discover that it’s the old story of the sugar over again. Your wife is an adulterated article. Her lovely yellow hair is⁠—dye. Her exquisite skin is⁠—pearl powder. Her plumpness is⁠—padding. And three inches of her height are⁠—in the boot-maker’s heels. Shut your eyes, and swallow your adulterated wife as you swallow your adulterated sugar⁠—and, I tell you again, you are one of the few men who can try the marriage experiment with a fair chance of success.”</p>
					<p>With that he uncrossed his legs again, and looked hard at Arnold. Arnold read the lesson, at last, in the right way. He gave up the hopeless attempt to circumvent Sir Patrick, and⁠—come what might of it⁠—dashed at a direct allusion to Sir Patrick’s niece.</p>
					<p>“That may be all very true, Sir, of some young ladies,” he said. “There is one I know of, who is nearly related to you, and who doesn’t deserve what you have said of the rest of them.”</p>
					<p>This was coming to the point. Sir Patrick showed his approval of Arnold’s frankness by coming to the point himself, as readily as his own whimsical humor would let him.</p>
					<p>“Is this female phenomenon my niece?” he inquired.</p>
					<p>“Yes, Sir Patrick.”</p>
					<p>“May I ask how you know that my niece is not an adulterated article, like the rest of them?”</p>
					<p>Arnold’s indignation loosened the last restraints that tied Arnold’s tongue. He exploded in the three words which mean three volumes in every circulating library in the kingdom.</p>
					<p>“I love her.”</p>
					<p>Sir Patrick sat back in his chair, and stretched out his legs luxuriously.</p>
					<p>“That’s the most convincing answer I ever heard in my life,” he said.</p>
					<p>“I’m in earnest!” cried Arnold, reckless by this time of every consideration but one. “Put me to the test, Sir! put me to the test!”</p>
					<p>“Oh, very well. The test is easily put.” He looked at Arnold, with the irrepressible humor twinkling merrily in his eyes, and twitching sharply at the corners of his lips. “My niece has a beautiful complexion. Do you believe in her complexion?”</p>
					<p>“There’s a beautiful sky above our heads,” returned Arnold. “I believe in the sky.”</p>
					<p>“Do you?” retorted Sir Patrick. “You were evidently never caught in a shower. My niece has an immense quantity of hair. Are you convinced that it all grows on her head?”</p>
					<p>“I defy any other woman’s head to produce the like of it!”</p>
					<p>“My dear Arnold, you greatly underrate the existing resources of the trade in hair! Look into the shopwindows. When you next go to London pray look into the show-windows. In the mean time, what do you think of my niece’s figure?”</p>
					<p>“Oh, come! there can’t be any doubt about <em>that!</em> Any man, with eyes in his head, can see it’s the loveliest figure in the world.”</p>
					<p>Sir Patrick laughed softly, and crossed his legs again.</p>
					<p>“My good fellow, of course it is! The loveliest figure in the world is the commonest thing in the world. At a rough guess, there are forty ladies at this lawn-party. Every one of them possesses a beautiful figure. It varies in price; and when it’s particularly seductive you may swear it comes from Paris. Why, how you stare! When I asked you what you thought of my niece’s figure, I meant⁠—how much of it comes from Nature, and how much of it comes from the Shop? I don’t know, mind! Do you?”</p>
					<p>“I’ll take my oath to every inch of it!”</p>
					<p>“Shop?”</p>
					<p>“Nature!”</p>
					<p>Sir Patrick rose to his feet; his satirical humor was silenced at last.</p>
					<p>“If ever I have a son,” he thought to himself, “that son shall go to sea!” He took Arnold’s arm, as a preliminary to putting an end to Arnold’s suspense. “If I <em>can</em> be serious about anything,” he resumed, “it’s time to be serious with you. I am convinced of the sincerity of your attachment. All I know of you is in your favor, and your birth and position are beyond dispute. If you have Blanche’s consent, you have mine.” Arnold attempted to express his gratitude. Sir Patrick, declining to hear him, went on. “And remember this, in the future. When you next want anything that I can give you, ask for it plainly. Don’t attempt to mystify <em>me</em> on the next occasion, and I will promise, on my side, not to mystify <em>you.</em> There, that’s understood. Now about this journey of yours to see your estate. Property has its duties, Master Arnold, as well as its rights. The time is fast coming when its rights will be disputed, if its duties are not performed. I have got a new interest in you, and I mean to see that you do your duty. It’s settled you are to leave Windygates today. Is it arranged how you are to go?”</p>
					<p>“Yes, Sir Patrick. Lady Lundie has kindly ordered the gig to take me to the station, in time for the next train.”</p>
					<p>“When are you to be ready?”</p>
					<p>Arnold looked at his watch. “In a quarter of an hour.”</p>
					<p>“Very good. Mind you <em>are</em> ready. Stop a minute! you will have plenty of time to speak to Blanche when I have done with you. You don’t appear to me to be sufficiently anxious about seeing your own property.”</p>
					<p>“I am not very anxious to leave Blanche, Sir⁠—that’s the truth of it.”</p>
					<p>“Never mind Blanche. Blanche is not business. They both begin with a B⁠—and that’s the only connection between them. I hear you have got one of the finest houses in this part of Scotland. How long are you going to stay in Scotland? How long are you going to stay in it?”</p>
					<p>“I have arranged (as I have already told you, Sir) to return to Windygates the day after tomorrow.”</p>
					<p>“What! Here is a man with a palace waiting to receive him⁠—and he is only going to stop one clear day in it!”</p>
					<p>“I am not going to stop in it at all, Sir Patrick⁠—I am going to stay with the steward. I’m only wanted to be present tomorrow at a dinner to my tenants⁠—and, when that’s over, there’s nothing in the world to prevent my coming back here. The steward himself told me so in his last letter.”</p>
					<p>“Oh, if the steward told you so, of course there is nothing more to be said!”</p>
					<p>“Don’t object to my coming back! pray don’t, Sir Patrick! I’ll promise to live in my new house when I have got Blanche to live in it with me. If you won’t mind, I’ll go and tell her at once that it all belongs to her as well as to me.”</p>
					<p>“Gently! gently! you talk as if you were married to her already!”</p>
					<p>“It’s as good as done, Sir! Where’s the difficulty in the way now?”</p>
					<p>As he asked the question the shadow of some third person, advancing from the side of the summerhouse, was thrown forward on the open sunlit space at the top of the steps. In a moment more the shadow was followed by the substance⁠—in the shape of a groom in his riding livery. The man was plainly a stranger to the place. He started, and touched his hat, when he saw the two gentlemen in the summerhouse.</p>
					<p>“What do you want?” asked Sir Patrick</p>
					<p>“I beg your pardon, Sir; I was sent by my master⁠—”</p>
					<p>“Who is your master?”</p>
					<p>“The Honorable <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Delamayn, Sir.”</p>
					<p>“Do you mean <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Geoffrey Delamayn?” asked Arnold.</p>
					<p>“No, Sir. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Geoffrey’s brother⁠—<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Julius. I have ridden over from the house, Sir, with a message from my master to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Geoffrey.”</p>
					<p>“Can’t you find him?”</p>
					<p>“They told me I should find him hereabouts, Sir. But I’m a stranger, and don’t rightly know where to look.” He stopped, and took a card out of his pocket. “My master said it was very important I should deliver this immediately. Would you be pleased to tell me, gentlemen, if you happen to know where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Geoffrey is?”</p>
					<p>Arnold turned to Sir Patrick. “I haven’t seen him. Have you?”</p>
					<p>“I have smelt him,” answered Sir Patrick, “ever since I have been in the summerhouse. There is a detestable taint of tobacco in the air⁠—suggestive (disagreeably suggestive to <em>my</em> mind) of your friend, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Delamayn.”</p>
					<p>Arnold laughed, and stepped outside the summerhouse.</p>
					<p>“If you are right, Sir Patrick, we will find him at once.” He looked around, and shouted, “Geoffrey!”</p>
					<p>A voice from the rose-garden shouted back, “Hullo!”</p>
					<p>“You’re wanted. Come here!”</p>
					<p>Geoffrey appeared, sauntering doggedly, with his pipe in his mouth, and his hands in his pockets.</p>
					<p>“Who wants me?”</p>
					<p>“A groom⁠—from your brother.”</p>
					<p>That answer appeared to electrify the lounging and lazy athlete. Geoffrey hurried, with eager steps, to the summerhouse. He addressed the groom before the man had time to speak With horror and dismay in his face, he exclaimed:</p>
					<p>“By Jupiter! Ratcatcher has relapsed!”</p>
					<p>Sir Patrick and Arnold looked at each other in blank amazement.</p>
					<p>“The best horse in my brother’s stables!” cried Geoffrey, explaining, and appealing to them, in a breath. “I left written directions with the coachman, I measured out his physic for three days; I bled him,” said Geoffrey, in a voice broken by emotion⁠—“I bled him myself, last night.”</p>
					<p>“I beg your pardon, Sir⁠—” began the groom.</p>
					<p>“What’s the use of begging my pardon? You’re a pack of infernal fools! Where’s your horse? I’ll ride back, and break every bone in the coachman’s skin! Where’s your horse?”</p>
					<p>“If you please, Sir, it isn’t Ratcatcher. Ratcatcher’s all right.”</p>
					<p>“Ratcatcher’s all right? Then what the devil is it?”</p>
					<p>“It’s a message, Sir.”</p>
					<p>“About what?”</p>
					<p>“About my lord.”</p>
					<p>“Oh! About my father?” He took out his handkerchief, and passed it over his forehead, with a deep gasp of relief. “I thought it was Ratcatcher,” he said, looking at Arnold, with a smile. He put his pipe into his mouth, and rekindled the dying ashes of the tobacco. “Well?” he went on, when the pipe was in working order, and his voice was composed again: “What’s up with my father?”</p>
					<p>“A telegram from London, Sir. Bad news of my lord.”</p>
					<p>The man produced his master’s card.</p>
					<p>Geoffrey read on it (written in his brother’s handwriting) these words:</p>
					<p>“I have only a moment to scribble a line on my card. Our father is dangerously ill⁠—his lawyer has been sent for. Come with me to London by the first train. Meet at the junction.”</p>
					<p>Without a word to any one of the three persons present, all silently looking at him, Geoffrey consulted his watch. Anne had told him to wait half an hour, and to assume that she had gone if he failed to hear from her in that time. The interval had passed⁠—and no communication of any sort had reached him. The flight from the house had been safely accomplished. Anne Silvester was, at that moment, on her way to the mountain inn.</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
